[Feature] Introduce MultiKueue Dispatcher API (#5410)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/693-multikueue/README.md

    - [MultiKueueCluster Controller](#multikueuecluster-controller)
    - [AdmissionCheck Controller](#admissioncheck-controller)
    - [Workload Controller](#workload-controller)
      - [Cluster Nomination Phase](#cluster-nomination-phase)

>       - [Workload Synchronization Phase](#workload-synchronization-phase)

Reviewer: I would suggest to add all the new content under one section "MultiKueue dispatcher API".

Even if this is done by the "Workload Controller", we may just x-ref the sections.

Author: done

For each workload coming to a ClusterQueue (with the MultiKueue AdmissionCheck enabled)
in the management cluster, and getting past the preadmission phase in the 
two-phase admission process (meaning that the global quota - total amount resources

> that can be consumed across all clusters - is ok), the MultiKueue controller will attempt to dispatch 
> the workload to worker clusters based on the configuration of the dispatcher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can be consumed across all clusters - is ok), 
MultiKueue controller will clone it in the defined worker clusters and wait 
until some Kueue running there admits the workload.
```
I don't think the new text is improvement over what was there. I think it is not based on "configuration of the dispatcher", but based on the dispatcher algorithm itself. 

However, it feels a technical detail we can skip here. I like in the previous version that it mentions "and wait 
until some Kueue running there admits the workload.".

If we want to put some details here, maybe 
```
that can be consumed across all clusters - is ok), 
MultiKueue controller will clone it in the defined worker clusters (possibly restricted to a subset) and wait 
until some Kueue running there admits the workload.
```

Will monitor the workloads in the management cluster and manage their MultiKueue specific
AdmissionCheckStates.

When distributing workloads across clusters, the MultiKueue Workload Controller follows a two-phase
process for a set of worker clusters selection.

##### Cluster Nomination Phase
The process of selecting a worker cluster for a workload depends on the dispatching mode configured
for the Dispatcher. MultiKueue supports three dispatching modes: Built-in, Sequential, External.

* Built-in Mode:
In this mode, all available clusters are considered for dispatching, workload is copied to each worker
cluster.

> * Sequential Mode:

Author: That's round-robin, one at the time is attempted.
As this is reference implementation, there is no criteria.

In this mode, only one cluster is chosen at a time for dispatching. The MultiKueue Workload Controller
nominates a single cluster by setting the `.status.multiKueueNominatedCluster` field. 

* External Mode:
In this mode, the selection of the worker cluster is entirely delegated to an external controller. The
external controller is responsible for setting the `.status.multiKueueNominatedCluster` field to the name of
the selected clusters.

> Kueue controls the time window `.disaptcher.RoundTimeout` during which the nominated clusters have the opportunity 

Reviewer 2: What happens after roundTimeout?

Author: I can ad more description here, e.g:
```
If the cluster fails to admit the workload within
the allocated time, Kueue unlocks the possibility for the external controller (in External Mode) to set a new value for
`.status.multiKueueNominatedCluster`, allowing other clusters to be nominated.
```

Will monitor the workloads in the management cluster and manage their MultiKueue specific
AdmissionCheckStates.

When distributing workloads across clusters, the MultiKueue Workload Controller follows a two-phase
process for a set of worker clusters selection.
##### Cluster Nomination Phase
The process of selecting worker clusters for a workload depends on the dispatching mode configured
for the Dispatcher. MultiKueue supports three dispatching modes: AllClusters (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-all-at-once`),
Incremental (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-incremental`), and External.

* **AllClusters Mode**:  
  In this mode, all available clusters are considered for dispatching at once, and the workload is copied to each worker cluster.

* **Incremental Mode**:  

>   In this mode, clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds. In each round, a new cluster is added to the set of previously nominated clusters by updating the `.status.multiKueueNominatedCluster` field to include the new cluster. This allows the workload to be considered by an increasing set of clusters over time, rather than all at once.

Reviewer: As we synced with @mszadkow, please move  `status.multiKueueNominatedCluster` into spec. 

Please also describe the API as in the following style https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/2724-topology-aware-scheduling#admin-facing-api

Will monitor the workloads in the management cluster and manage their MultiKueue specific
AdmissionCheckStates.

> When distributing workloads across clusters, the MultiKueue Workload Controller first nominates 

Reviewer: To be fair, again, it feels like introducing more confusion than clarifying. First, the field `spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` is introduced later. Second, the "the MultiKueue Workload Controller first nominates "  is not really true, the nomination is done by the dispatcher. It might be internal, or external. 

I think the previous version of the paragraph is actually capturing enough details. We can drill into details in the new  MultiKueue Dispatcher API section.

	GCInterval *metav1.Duration `json:"gcInterval"`
	Origin *string `json:"origin,omitempty"`
	WorkerLostTimeout *metav1.Duration `json:"workerLostTimeout,omitempty"`
  Dispatcher *MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcher `json:"multiKueueWorkloadDispatcher,omitempty"`
}

type MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcher struct {
  // Strategy defines the strategy for selecting a worker cluster to handle the workload.
  // - All: The initial MultiKueue behavior where the workload is distributed to all workers simultaneously,
  //        and the first worker to successfully reserve the workload's required resources is selected.
  // - RoundRobin: Distributes the workload to one worker at a time in a circular order.

>   Strategy MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcherStrategy `json:"strategy"`

Reviewer: Maybe MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcherStrategy should be enum corresponding to two strategies:
- TryAllAtOnce
- Dispatcher

When the Dispatcher is set, then MultiKueue would wait for the Dispatcher to set the value of the new API field "status.multiKueueNominatedCluster=w2". After the timeout passes it should wait for the new nominated cluster to be set by the dispatcher. This way the dispatcher could be a plugin which does prioritization and round-robin of the clusters. 

Another possibility is that the dispatcher sets `status.multiKueueClustersOrder=[w2,w3,w1]`  and Kueue sequentially probes them in the specified order. This model is probably simpler to implement.

Then we need to have some `spec.dispatcher` field to indicate if this is a custom dispatcher of built-in. For example it could be string similar to provisioningClassName in ProvisioningRequest.

For now this is just a high level overview, I think this is a challenging problem which requires more API design.
cc @tenzen-y @mwielgus

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

### MultiKueue Dispatcher API

The MultiKueue Workload Controller follows a two-step process: first, it nominates worker clusters for each workload based on the configured dispatching mode;
then, it synchronizes the workload by creating and managing its copies in the nominated clusters. 
This ensures that only one cluster ultimately admits and runs the workload, while the management cluster maintains up-to-date status by tracking the admitted job.

#### Cluster Nomination Phase
Cluster nomination phase looks differently depending on the configured dispatching mode.
MultiKueue supports three dispatching modes: AllClusters (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-all-at-once`),
Incremental (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-incremental`), and External.

> * **AllClusters Mode**:  

Reviewer: Let's align the naming consistently, either:
- AllAtOnce
- AllClusters
- AllWorkers
I'm good with any of them, maybe slightly leaning to AllAtOnce, but most importantly we should align them

* **AllAtOnce Mode**:  
  In this mode, all available clusters are considered for dispatching at once, and the workload is copied to each worker cluster.

* **Incremental Mode**:  
  In this mode, clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 
  The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are added to the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field.
  During the first 5-minute round, only these clusters are eligible to admit the workload.
  If none of the initial clusters admit the workload within the round's duration, the next round begins, and 3 additional clusters are nominated.
  This incremental approach continues, adding 3 more clusters in each subsequent round, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.
  This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once,
  which can help optimize resource usage and reduce unnecessary workload duplication.
  The workload's status condition `HaveNominatedWorkers` stores the round duration starting time.

>   This allows the controller to determine when to advance to the next nomination round based on the elapsed time since the round began.

Reviewer: Actually, I think for the simplicity of the implementation we can assume the time is measured just "in-memory", because in case of Kueue restart we will just spend additional 5min in the same round, this is acceptable I think. We can leave it as a potential improvement based on user feedback.

* **External Mode**:  
  In this mode, the selection of worker clusters is entirely delegated to an external controller. 
  The external controller is responsible for setting the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field to the names of the selected clusters.
  If the nominated clusters field is changed by the external controller, workloads are removed from any clusters that are no longer nominated,

>   even if they were previously admitted there.

Reviewer: I would suggest to make it immutable once the workload is admitted. There is a small race condition if someone wants to modify the multiKueueNominatedClusters, and we don't yet see the event that the workload is admitted. In this case, indeed, we may update the nominated clusters, but I would make it as a note, or even leave to implementation decisions. What is important is to make it immutable once we realize the workload is admitted.

#### Workload Synchronization Phase
Based on the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field, the actual copy of the workload is created in
the nominated worker clusters. The MultiKueue Workload Controller ensures that the workload is
synchronized from the management cluster to the selected worker clusters.

Once the workload is admitted and other clusters are cleaned up, the real job is created to match the
workload. This guarantees that the workload will not start in more than one cluster. The workload will
also receive an annotation indicating the cluster where it is actually running.

Changes to Workload type:
```go
type WorkloadSpec struct {

// MultiKueueNominatedClusters specifies the list of cluster names that have been nominated for scheduling by MultiKueue.
// This field is optional.

> MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I would like to make it immutable while the workload is admitted.

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

### MultiKueue Dispatcher API

The MultiKueue Workload Controller consists of nomination nd synchronization: 
first, it nominates worker clusters for each workload based on the configured dispatching mode;
then, it synchronizes the workload by creating and managing its copies in the nominated clusters. 
This ensures that only one cluster ultimately admits and runs the workload, 
while the management cluster maintains up-to-date status by tracking the admitted job.

#### Cluster Nomination
Cluster nomination phase looks differently depending on the configured dispatching mode.

> MultiKueue supports three dispatching modes: AllAtOnce (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-all-at-once`),

Author: updated

> Incremental (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-incremental`), and External.

Reviewer: In order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3) we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.
We also, implement a built-in incremental dispatcher as a reference implementation. 

Including the pre-existing dispatching algorithm (using all at once approach) we distinguish the following dispatchers:

> Incremental (`kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-incremental`), and External.

Author: done

* **AllAtOnce Mode**:  
  In this mode, all available clusters are considered for dispatching at once, and the workload is copied to each worker cluster.

> * **Incremental Mode**:  

Reviewer 3: How to manage if clusters have already been nominated in the previous round?
How to sort the available clusters? alphabetical order?

  In this mode, clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 

>   The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are added to the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are set in the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field.
```

>   During the first 5-minute round, only these clusters are eligible to admit the workload.
>   If none of the initial clusters admit the workload within the round's duration, the next round begins, and 3 additional clusters are nominated.
>   This incremental approach continues, adding 3 more clusters in each subsequent round, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.
>   This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once,
>   which can help optimize resource usage and reduce unnecessary workload duplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If none of the initial clusters admit the workload within the round's duration, the next round begins, and 3 additional clusters are nominated.
  This incremental approach continues, adding 3 more clusters in each subsequent round, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.
  This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once.
```

Reviewer: The last sentence "  which can help optimize resource usage and reduce unnecessary workload duplication." is motivation rather than "Design detail". Motivation is better to capture in Story section.

> * **External Mode**:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **External**:  
```

  In this mode, the selection of worker clusters is entirely delegated to an external controller. 
  The external controller is responsible for setting the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field to the names of the selected clusters.
  If the nominated clusters field is changed by the external controller, workloads are removed from any clusters that are no longer nominated.

>   While the workload is in the admitted state, the `MultiKueueNominatedClusters` field is treated as immutable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  While the workload is in the admitted state, the `MultiKueueNominatedClusters` field is immutable. 
```

  Any updates to this field while the workload is admitted will be rejected by the MultiKueue controller 
  to ensure scheduling consistency and prevent unintended cluster transitions.

#### Workload Synchronization
Based on the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field, the actual copy of the workload is created in
the nominated worker clusters. The MultiKueue Workload Controller ensures that the workload is

> synchronized from the management cluster to the selected worker clusters.

Author: added

Once the workload is admitted and other clusters are cleaned up, the real job is created to match the
workload. This guarantees that the workload will not start in more than one cluster. The workload will
also receive an annotation indicating the cluster where it is actually running.

Changes to Workload type:
```go
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  // MultiKueueNominatedClusters specifies the list of cluster names that have been nominated for scheduling by MultiKueue.
  // This field is optional.
  // 
  // +optional

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'Admitted')) || oldObject.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters == self.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters",message="multiKueueNominatedClusters is immutable when the workload is in the 'Admitted' state"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'Admitted' && c.status == "True")) || oldObject.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters == self.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters",message="multiKueueNominatedClusters is immutable when the workload is in the 'Admitted' state"
```

>   // This field is immutable while the workload is admitted. Any attempt to modify it during the admitted state will be rejected by the controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // This field is immutable while the workload is admitted. 
```

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I'm ok either way. 

Indeed, generally, controllers should modify status rather than spec. 

However, Workload API is special, because it is "internal to Kueue". Note that `kueue-controller-manager` creates the Workload instance, and so it needs permissions to write spec.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Author: I can stick to status as initially was done - to not break the convention

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Author: although then it's bit more complicated to enforce the constraint about the status condition admitted

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Ah, I see, if it is going to complicate checking the "Admitted" condition to verify mutability, then I'm ok to move it to `status` actually. In any case "Workload" is API which is not facing users, only knowledgable admins, so I think we can have some freedom here.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: I am revisiting this one a bit.
let me think this one more.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: > My only small hesitation is that it is not strictly required for the feature as it would be for external automation only. Currently the selected cluster name is placed in the admission check message. It should be simple to implement so it does not seem to increase the risk much for 0.13.

I believe that introducing ".status.clusterName" would be better for this feature to mitigate the edge cases for the timing when the .spec.nominatedClusterNames must be immutable.

The ".status.clusterName" allows us to make the ".spec.nominatedClusterName" immutable when the ".status.clusterName" is assigned. Especially, when there are multiple AdmissionChecks, the external component can recognize whether or not it must re-assign new nominated clusters to the Workload. Otherwise, the external dispatcher needs to check the corresponding AdmissionCheck checkState and Workload QuotaReserved condition.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I see, makes sense, then we can validate just using CEL.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Author: Resetting the field on the eviction is important, yes... 
I also don't see a "proper" moment to reset this.

When you think of `nominatedClusterNames` as a process of nomination rather desired state it makes sense to move it to the status.
Bc, you can nominate let's say 5 clusters, while only one of them will become real worker (I am talking about External), so it's not desired state.
It makes sense to have them both in status: ".status.clusterName" and ".status. nominatedClusterNames"

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I think there is some misunderstanding here. 

I think actually reseting the clusters is quite important, otherwise after re-admission we will start to admit into all clusters again at the same time. Maybe for some use cases we could have a knob to keep them, but I think the baseline functionality should reset, thus some analogy may not be perfect.

Regarding nodeSelectors they are actually reset on eviction, so that we can set new node selectors if we admit to another ResourceFlavor

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: I think a better analogy might actually be `.status.loadBalancer.*` field. These field hosts the set of IP addresses which are managed by an external controller, can be added / deleted there. 

I think the MultiKueue dispatcher is conceptually close to LoadBalancer.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: @tenzen-y, I consider Wconsider the Workload API is not end-user facing API -  it is for admins and automation, so I would prefer to make pragmatic choices about it.  If we put it into spec, then we need to design how the flow of eviction and re-admission will look like.

Are there any downsides of putting the field into status, which could bite us in the foreseeable future?

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: I would approve `.status.nominatedClusterNames`.
As an additional request, I would like to reset the nominatedClusterNames (NCNs) when the Workload gets .status.clusterName. In other words, I would like to add a Workload validation so that Workload does not have both clusterName and NCNs, which means both fields are mutually exclusive. However, the resetting of the NCNs field is responsible for the dispatcher even when a specified dispatcher is external.

---
After more consideration, I could find that there is no way to guarantee the atomic behavior when the dispatcher needs to reset the NCNs as you mentioned. 

However, in the case of external dispatchers, the race condition issue still could occur because the updating of Admission state is out of the scope of external dispatchers. In other words, when they use an external dispatcher, we still need 2 API requests by the kueue-controller-manager and an external dispatcher. 

This KEP aims to implement and expose the dispatching mechanism. So, I think we could revisit in the next iteration how to mitigate the non atomic behavior when they use an external dispatcher.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: > However, in the case of external dispatchers, the race condition issue still could occur because the updating of Admission state is out of the scope of external dispatchers. In other words, when they use an external dispatcher, we still need 2 API requests by the kueue-controller-manager and an external dispatcher.

I expect the external dispatcher, when giving up, to set the Workloads status.admissionCheck.state to Retry. This will trigger the internal Workload controller to Evict the workload and as part of the evictions to reset the status.nominatedClusterNames field, along with resetting status.clusterName.

So I dont see any race condition for external dispatchers in this model.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: > I would like to add a Workload validation so that Workload does not have both clusterName and NCNs, which means both fields are mutually exclusive. However, the resetting of the NCNs field is responsible for the dispatcher even when a specified dispatcher is external.

As we discussed with Marcin we would like to validate so that the selected cluster is.among the set of nominated clusters, to prevent races when external dispatcher removes NCN selected by MK WorkloadController concurrently. However, if we clear NCN this becomes tricker. We could also clear NCN in a follow up request, but this means extra qps.

So I was thinking about just saying that whenever clusterName is set it is validated against NCN, and at that point NCN is ignored. wdyt?

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: > > I would like to add a Workload validation so that Workload does not have both clusterName and NCNs, which means both fields are mutually exclusive. However, the resetting of the NCNs field is responsible for the dispatcher even when a specified dispatcher is external.
> 
> As we discussed with Marcin we would like to validate so that the selected cluster is.among the set of nominated clusters, to prevent races when external dispatcher removes NCN selected by MK WorkloadController concurrently. However, if we clear NCN this becomes tricker. We could also clear NCN in a follow up request, but this means extra qps.
> 
> So I was thinking about just saying that whenever clusterName is set it is validated against NCN, and at that point NCN is ignored. wdyt?

I think both nominatedClusterNames and clusterName must not exist together. If we allow that, we should move the nominatedClsuterNames to spec since in the case of allowing coexistence those, the NCNs is no longer current state.

Additionally, I don't think the race is problem since the race could be resolved by external dispatcher reconciliation mechanism. When they face updating NCNs error, the dispatcher reconciler just requeue it to workqueue by error. And then in the next reconciliation, it checks if the clusterName already has been selected. After the external dispatcher recognizes the selected clusterName, it just ignore NCNs updating.

>   MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`

Reviewer: > I think both nominatedClusterNames and clusterName must not exist together. If we allow that, we should move the nominatedClsuterNames to spec since in the case of allowing coexistence those, the NCNs is no longer current state.

My only concern was about validation here, but actually the webhook could compare the old version of nominatedClusterNames when new clusterName is set. So I'm good with that. I think this will work fine.

> Additionally, I don't think the race is problem since the race could be resolved by external dispatcher reconciliation mechanism. When they face updating NCNs error, the dispatcher reconciler just requeue it to workqueue by error. And then in the next reconciliation, it checks if the clusterName already has been selected. After the external dispatcher recognizes the selected clusterName, it just ignore NCNs updating.

Yeah, I think this is not an issue.

}
```

Extension of MultiKueue configuration:
```go
 type MultiKueue struct {
  ...
   // dispatcherName specifies the name of the dispatcher responsible for selecting worker clusters

>    // to handle the workload. If not set, the default dispatcher (AllAtOnce) is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // to handle the workload. There are two built-in values supported:
   // - kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-all-at-once (AllAtOnce)
   // - kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-incremental (Incremental)
   // If not set, the default dispatcher (AllAtOnce) is used.
```

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

> ### Since Kueue 0.13: MultiKueue Dispatcher API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### MultiKueue Dispatcher API
```

> In order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3) we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Kueue 0.13, in order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3), we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.
```

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

### MultiKueue Dispatcher API

Since Kueue 0.13, in order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3), we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.
Additionally, we implement a built-in incremental dispatcher as a reference implementation. 

When a custom Dispatcher API is used, instead of creating the copy of the Workload on all clusters the
the MultiKueue Workload Controller only creates the copy of the Workload on the subset of worker clusters
specified in the Workload's .spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters field.

Including the pre-existing dispatching algorithm we distinguish the following dispatchers:

* **AllAtOnce**:  
The workload is copied to all available worker clusters at once. This is the default dispatching algorithm.

* **Incremental**:  

> In this mode, clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 
```

The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are set in the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field in the Workload.
If none of the clusters admit the workload within the current round's duration, the next round begins, 
and 3 additional clusters are nominated, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.
This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once.

* **External**:  

> In this mode, the selection of worker clusters is delegated to an external controller. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The selection of worker clusters is delegated to an external controller. 
```

The external controller is responsible for setting the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field to the names of the selected clusters.
If the nominated clusters field is changed by the external controller, workloads are removed from any clusters that are no longer nominated.
While the workload is in the admitted state, the `MultiKueueNominatedClusters` field is immutable. 

#### Workload Synchronization

While the Workload is pending, the dispatcher can add or remove clusters from the list, and the Workload
Controller synchronizes the value of the field with the subset of worker clusters with the Workload copy.

Changes to Workload type:
```go
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  // MultiKueueNominatedClusters specifies the list of cluster names that have been nominated for scheduling by MultiKueue.
  // This field is optional.
  // 

>   // +optional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // +listType=set
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10
  // +optional
```
It does not make sense to nominate more than the max number of clusters which is currently 10. We can revisit this in the future, but should move both at the same time.

  // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(self.status.conditions.exists(c, c.type == 'Admitted' && c.status == "True")) || oldObject.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters == self.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters",message="multiKueueNominatedClusters is immutable when the workload is in the 'Admitted' state"
  // This field is immutable while the workload is admitted. 
  MultiKueueNominatedClusters []string `json:"multiKueueNominatedClusters,omitempty"`
}
```

Extension of MultiKueue configuration:
```go
 type MultiKueue struct {
  ...

>    // dispatcherName specifies the name of the dispatcher responsible for selecting worker clusters
>    // to handle the workload. There are two built-in values supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // dispatcherName specifies the name of the dispatcher responsible for selecting worker clusters
   // to handle the workload. 
   //
   // The value must be a valid domain-prefixed path (e.g. acme.io/foo) -
   // all characters before the first "/" must be a valid subdomain as defined
   // by RFC 1123. All characters trailing the first "/" must be valid HTTP Path
   // characters as defined by RFC 3986. The value cannot exceed 63 characters.
   // 
   // There are two built-in values supported:
```

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

### Since Kueue 0.13: MultiKueue Dispatcher API

In order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3) we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.
Additionally, we implement a built-in incremental dispatcher as a reference implementation. 
Including the pre-existing dispatching algorithm we distinguish the following dispatchers:

* **AllAtOnce**:  
The workload is copied to all available worker clusters at once. This is the default dispatching algorithm.

* **Incremental**:  
  In this mode, clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 
  The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are set in the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field in the Workload.

>   If none of the initial clusters admit the workload within the round's duration, the next round begins, and 3 additional clusters are nominated.
>   This incremental approach continues, adding 3 more clusters in each subsequent round, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If none of the clusters admit the workload within the current round's duration, the next round begins, 
  and 3 additional clusters are nominated, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.
```
to make it a bit shorter while conveying the same info

  This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once.

* **External**:  

>   In this mode, the selection of worker clusters is entirely delegated to an external controller. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In this mode, the selection of worker clusters is delegated to an external controller. 
```

  The external controller is responsible for setting the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field to the names of the selected clusters.
  If the nominated clusters field is changed by the external controller, workloads are removed from any clusters that are no longer nominated.
  While the workload is in the admitted state, the `MultiKueueNominatedClusters` field is immutable. 

#### Workload Synchronization
Based on the `.spec.multiKueueNominatedClusters` field, the actual copy of the workload is created in
the nominated worker clusters. The MultiKueue Workload Controller ensures that the workload is

> synchronized from the management cluster to the selected worker clusters.

Reviewer: Drop it as it is the same content as the paragraph below.

- `WorkerLostTimeout` - defines the time a local workload's multikueue admission check state is kept Ready
if the connection with its reserving worker cluster is lost.

### MultiKueue Dispatcher API

Since Kueue 0.13, in order to meet the requirements of [Story 3](#story-3), we introduce an API for custom dispatching algorithms.
When a custom Dispatcher API is used, instead of creating the copy of the Workload on all clusters the
the MultiKueue Workload Controller only creates the copy of the Workload on the subset of worker clusters
specified in the Workload's .spec.nominatedClusterNames field.

Additionally, we implement a built-in incremental dispatcher as a reference implementation. 

> Including the pre-existing dispatching algorithm we distinguish the following dispatchers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Including the pre-existing dispatching algorithm until 0.12, we distinguish the following dispatchers:
```

* **AllAtOnce**:  
The workload is copied to all available worker clusters at once. This is the default dispatching algorithm.

* **Incremental**:  
Clusters are nominated incrementally in rounds of fixed duration (5 minutes per round). 
The process begins by nominating an initial set of 3 clusters, which are set in the `.spec.nominatedClusterNames` field in the Workload.
If none of the clusters admit the workload within the current round's duration, the next round begins, 
and 3 additional clusters are nominated, until the workload is admitted or all eligible clusters have been considered.

> This strategy allows for a controlled and gradual expansion of candidate clusters, rather than dispatching the workload to all clusters at once.

Reviewer 3: What if the .spec.nominatedClusterNames after all eligible clusters have been considered?
Is the field reset to empty?

If yes, it would be better to mention it here.

Reviewer: I would give ownership to the field to the dispatcher to decide when to reset etc.

Reviewer 3: Here, the dispatcher is implemented by upstream Kueue, right?

Reviewer: We can have both external dispatchers, and built-in.

Reviewer 3: This description is for Incremental. So, the dispatcher is upstream one, IIUC.
My question is about the upstream Incremental dispatcher.

Author: I think the conclusion of the Incremental is the same as AllAtOnce.
It goes incrementally and last and continuing step is all clusters.
E.g. (if let's say 9 clusters):
1. c1,c2,c3
2. c1...c6
3. c1...c9
4. keeps c1...c9 and returns "no more workers to nominate"

Maybe it should be "all workers already nominated"

Reviewer 3: In step 4, how to expose the information? If the exposure of information is `Rejected` in the workload.status.admissionCheckState.state, I'm ok with that.

I just want to clarify the behavior in this documentation. Additioinallly, coud you mention the fact that the eviction mechanism is same for both AllAtOnce and Incremental, and the Workload will get Rejected admission check state.

Reviewer: I think in the first version we don't really need to do anything about it, I would go for simplicity.

Note that the current built-in dispatcher we currently have does not indicate that "all workers already nominated".

Also, this is kind of normal state. What we could say is that "all workers already nominated, and the timeout for admission is exceeded", with timeout say 10min. However, I would vote for introducing the timeout as we have some user request indicating the need.

Reviewer 3: > I think in the first version we don't really need to do anything about it, I would go for simplicity.

I didn't recommend introducing a new mechanism. I requested to clarify that the Workload will get Reject Admission state after all potential clusters are rejected in the Incremental mode.

> Also, this is kind of normal state. What we could say is that "all workers already nominated, and the timeout for admission is exceeded", with timeout say 10min. However, I would vote for introducing the timeout as we have some user request indicating the need.

In the first release (0.13), we can have timeout as a hardcoded. Then, we can introduce some API surface in the 0.14.

Reviewer: Good question. I think this would be a sensible extension, but I wouldnt say it is necessary in first iteration. Note that we dont reject the workload until 0.12 with the built in dispatcher. 

wdyt @tenzen-y?

Reviewer: As i discussed with Marcin, in the future, hopefully 0.14 we will add parametrizing dispatcher. Then we could have a boolean flag indicating if the dispatcher should auto reject or not.

Reviewer 3: > IIUC they do not get rejected, they stay nominated for admission from point of view of this feature.
Do you want to set the rejection state after another round has expired?

Oh, I see. Thank you for the good call. Could you mention in this proposal about what if the workload could not be scheduled to all clusters in the Incremental dispatcher? Is it just record cluster assignment error in the controller-manager logs?

> Good question. I think this would be a sensible extension, but I wouldnt say it is necessary in first iteration. Note that we dont reject the workload until 0.12 with the built in dispatcher.
> 
> wdyt @tenzen-y?

I'm ok without Reject state for now.

Reviewer 3: This coulde be resolved.

Reviewer: sgtm

* **External**:  
The selection of worker clusters is delegated to an external controller. 
The external controller is responsible for setting the `.spec.nominatedClusterNames` field to the names of the selected clusters.
If the nominated clusters field is changed by the external controller, workloads are removed from any clusters that are no longer nominated.

> While the workload is in the admitted state, the `MultiKueueNominatedClusters` field is immutable. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the workload `.status.clusterName` is assigned, the `nominatedClusterNames` field is immutable. 
```

#### Workload Synchronization

While the Workload is pending, the dispatcher can add or remove clusters from the list, and the Workload
Controller synchronizes the value of the field with the subset of worker clusters with the Workload copy.

Changes to Workload type:
```go
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  // nominatedClusterNames specifies the list of cluster names that have been nominated for scheduling.
  // This field is optional.
  // 
  // +listType=set
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(self.status.clusterName != null) || oldObject.spec.nominatedClusterNames == self.spec.nominatedClusterNames",message="nominatedClusterNames is immutable when the workload is assigned to a cluster"

Reviewer 3: Does `oldObject.spec.nominatedClusterNames == self.spec.nominatedClusterNames"` validation means that retrying the same clusters is not allowed?

Reviewer 3: Ah, I was misunderstood. You're right.
Thank you.

>   // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!(self.status.clusterName != null) || oldObject.spec.nominatedClusterNames == self.spec.nominatedClusterNames",message="nominatedClusterNames is immutable when the workload is assigned to a cluster"

Reviewer 3: Or we might want to use `size(self.status.clusterName) == 0` to avoid distinguishing between an empty slice and null slice.

  // +optional
  nominatedClusterNames []string `json:"nominatedClusterNames,omitempty"`
}

type WorkloadStatus struct {
  // clusterName is the name of the cluster where the workload is actually assigned.
  // +optional

>   clusterName *string `json:"clusterName,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Yes, for sure

}
```

Extension of MultiKueue configuration:
```go

>  type MultiKueue struct {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 type MultiKueueConfigSpec struct {
```

Do you mean `MultiKueueConfigSpec`?

Reviewer 3: I see. In that case, could you mention that?

Author: As mentioned in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/5410#discussion_r2200829408
More specific comment was added

While the workload `.status.clusterName` is assigned, the `nominatedClusterNames` field is immutable.

#### Workload Synchronization

While the Workload is pending, the dispatcher can add or remove clusters from the list, and the Workload
Controller synchronizes the value of the field with the subset of worker clusters with the Workload copy.

Changes to Workload type:
```go
type WorkloadSpec struct {
  // nominatedClusterNames specifies the list of cluster names that have been nominated for scheduling.
  // This field is optional.
  // 
  // +listType=set
  // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10
  // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.status.clusterName == null || oldObject.spec.nominatedClusterNames == self.spec.nominatedClusterNames",message="nominatedClusterNames is immutable when the workload is assigned to a cluster"
  // +optional
  nominatedClusterNames []string `json:"nominatedClusterNames,omitempty"`
}

type WorkloadStatus struct {
  // clusterName is the name of the cluster where the workload is actually assigned.
  // This field is reset after the Workload is evicted / preempted.
  // +optional
  clusterName *string `json:"clusterName,omitempty"`
}
```

> Extension of MultiKueue configuration:

Author: > // MultiKueue controls the behaviour of the MultiKueue AdmissionCheck Controller
so it should be 
```
Extension of MultiKueue AdmissionCheck Controller configuration:
```

	GCInterval *metav1.Duration `json:"gcInterval"`
	Origin *string `json:"origin,omitempty"`
	WorkerLostTimeout *metav1.Duration `json:"workerLostTimeout,omitempty"`
  Dispatcher *MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcher `json:"multiKueueWorkloadDispatcher,omitempty"`
}

const(

>   DispatcherModeBuiltIn = "BuiltIn"

Reviewer 2: "BuiltIn" doesn't tell what the dispatcher is doing.

  DispatcherModeSequential = "Sequential"
)

type MultiKueueWorkloadDispatcher struct {
// DispatcherName defines the dispatcher responsible for selecting worker clusters to handle the workload.
// - If specified, the workload will be handled by the named dispatcher.
// - If not specified, the workload will be handled by the default (BuiltIn) dispatcher.

>   DispatcherName *string `json:"dispatcherName,omitempty"`

Reviewer: For pluggable APIs use the domain prefix to indicate the plugin provider. 

For example look at definition of Job [ManagedBY API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8458cfed43f96e05fac0bfa43fbec473c39d5689/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L462-L470), example value being `kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue`.

Maybe:  `kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-all-at-once` and `kueue.x-k8s.io/multikueue-dispatcher-sequential` (but we can discuss particular names in other comments)

// RoundTimeout specifies the duration given to a selected workers to attempt to reserve the workload's required resources.
// This field is only applicable when the DispatcherName is specified. Defaults to 5 min.

>   RoundTimeout *metav1.Duration `json:"timeout,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: This is specific to Sequential dispatcher and should probably go to sequential dispatcher configuration.

Author: This has it's functionality also when we use External dispatcher, this way it's not used only in this old (current) mode (BuiltIn)

	GCInterval *metav1.Duration `json:"gcInterval"`
	Origin *string `json:"origin,omitempty"`
	WorkerLostTimeout *metav1.Duration `json:"workerLostTimeout,omitempty"`
  DispatcherName *string `json:"dispatcherName,omitempty"`

>   RoundTimeout *metav1.Duration `json:"timeout,omitempty"`

Author: Sure, make sense to me
